**[The Sentence]{.underline}**

A set of words that is complete, typically containing a subject and
predicate, conveying a statement, question, exclamation, or command, and
consisting of a main clause and sometimes one or more subordinate
clauses.

 Sentences can be classified in two ways: based on their function and
based on their structure. When you describe a sentence based on its
function, you're describing it based on what it does. 

**Declarative sentences**

A declarative sentence is a sentence that:

-   Makes a statement

-   Provides an explanation

-   Conveys one or more facts

Declarative sentences are among the most common sentences in the English
language. You use them every day. They end with periods.

Here are a few examples of declarative sentences: 

-   I forgot to wear a hat today.

-   Your pizza is doughy because you didn't cook it long enough.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Spiders and crabs are both members of the arthropod family.

**Interrogative sentences**

An interrogative sentence is a sentence that asks a question, like:

-   How many pet iguanas do you have?

-   May I sit here?

-   Aren't there enough umbrellas to go around?

One hallmark of interrogative sentences is that they usually begin with
pronouns or auxiliary verbs. When this kind of sentence *does* start
with the subject, it's usually in colloquial speech. For example:

-   He went there again?

-   Rats can't swim, right?

**Exclamatory sentences**

Much like an interrogative question ends with a question mark, an
exclamatory sentence ends with an exclamation mark. These sentences
communicate heightened emotion and are often used as greetings,
warnings, or rallying cries. Examples include:

-   Hey!

-   High voltage! Do not touch!

-   This is Sparta!

The only difference between a declarative sentence and an exclamatory
one is the punctuation at the end. But that punctuation makes a big
difference in how the reader or listener interprets the sentence.
Consider the difference between these:

-   It's snowing.

-   It's snowing

**Imperative sentences**

An imperative sentence is a sentence that gives the reader advice,
instructions, a command or makes a request. 

An imperative sentence can end in either a period or an exclamation
point, depending on the urgency of the sentiment being expressed.
Imperative sentences include:

-   Get off my lawn!

-   After the timer dings, take the cookies out of the oven. 

-   Always pack an extra pair of socks.

With an imperative sentence, the subject is generally omitted because
the reader understands they're the one being addressed.

**Conditional sentences**

Conditional sentences are sentences that discuss factors and their
consequences in an if-then structure. Their structure is:

Conditional clause (typically known as the if-clause) + consequence of
that clause. 

A basic example of a conditional sentence is: 

-   When you eat ice cream too fast, you get brain freeze.

Getting more specific, that sentence is an example of a zero conditional
sentence.  
